Slovak multi-question evidence extraction - approach

Task framing
Each packet is a Slovak passage, its article heading and four questions. For every question the
solution either returns a passage span or abstains. Because the packet score multiplies the mean
question utility by the weakest published claim, the decision of which questions to answer is made
per packet, not per question.

Model
A generic pretrained multilingual encoder (FacebookAI/xlm-roberta-large from the Hugging Face Hub)
is fine-tuned as an extractive reader with start/end heads. The first segment is
"<heading>: <question>" and the second segment is the passage (max 512 tokens, stride 128 for the
rare longer passages), so the heading supplies the topic but can never be selected as an answer.
Unanswerable questions, and windows that do not contain the gold span, are trained to point at the
leading special token (SQuAD 2.0 style). Gold offsets are mapped to tokens with the fast tokenizer's
offset mapping; leading/trailing whitespace is trimmed.

Training
AdamW (lr 1.5e-5, betas 0.9/0.98, weight decay 0.01 except biases and LayerNorm), layer-wise
learning-rate decay 0.95, 10% linear warm-up then linear decay, batch 16 (two micro-batches of 8),
bf16 autocast, gradient clipping 1.0, length-bucketed batches, fixed seeds. Up to two models are
trained (seeds 42 and 1337), each for 3 epochs, and each leaves out a different 12% of source-document
groups. A timing probe after 30 steps projects the runtime and, if needed, reduces to 2 epochs and/or
a single model so the whole run stays inside the 90-minute limit.

Validation and calibration
All held-out data are whole group_id values, never packets split across groups. The official metric is
reimplemented (NFKC + casefold, word/punctuation tokens, multiset token F1, weakest-claim packet
factor, group-averaged mean). For every question the reader produces a candidate pool (top start/end
pairs, at most 128 tokens, merged across windows) and a null score. On the held-out groups:
- a logistic regression maps (null margin, mean null margin of the other three questions in the
  packet, count of question content words absent from passage and heading) to P(unanswerable); its
  held-out predictions come from 5-fold group cross-validation inside the held-out set;
- a softmax temperature for the span distribution and a small bias on the null log-odds are chosen
  on a coarse grid by the official metric; abstaining on everything is kept as a fallback candidate.

Decision rule
For each question, the answer span is chosen by minimum Bayes risk: the candidate with the highest
expected token F1 against the model's span distribution. This also gives a distribution of the claim
quality (0 if the question is unanswerable). For each packet all 16 answer/abstain subsets are scored
by their exact expected packet score, E[(sum of utilities) x (weakest claim)] / 4, with quality
discretised to 0.1 steps and questions treated as independent given the calibrated probabilities.
The subset with the highest expected score is published. When two models are trained, their
calibrated null probabilities and span distributions are averaged before this step.

Output
working/submission.csv with columns id,spans; each spans cell is a compact JSON array of four integer
pairs, [-1,-1] for abstention, otherwise 0 <= start < end <= len(passage). The script asserts row
count, unique ids and span validity before writing.

Reproducibility and runtime
python solution.py <public_dir> <output_csv>. Only train.csv and test.csv from the public directory
are read; the only download is the public xlm-roberta-large checkpoint and tokenizer. Seeds are fixed
and deterministic algorithms are requested (GPU kernels may still introduce tiny differences). The
run is planned for one A10G (24 GB) within 90 minutes, including a 14-minute safety margin.
